people don't know about
this I had to keep it a
[Music]
secret uh it's really really
difficult
Ronda Ronda you have voted the best
female athlete of all time what was it
that made you the person that sits in
front of me today so when I was a kid it
was tough my dad he ended up taking his
life when I was eight and in school I
got picked on a lot I actually dropped
out when I was 16 and moved away from
home to train full-time but a lot of the
coaches thought that being abusive to
the athletes is what gave them the best
results my first coach just located my
job people don't know about this but I
get concussions all the time and every
time you get a concussion it's easier to
get another one so by the time I got
into MMA I had to be able to finish the
person off immediately it was those
experiences that made me the world
champion and you stacked up a bunch of
records including the fastest ever
win fastest submission fastest title
defense but then that loss to hly just
like
that yeah my whole world turned upside
down I had to disappear for a while and
um you decided to move on to the WWE you
don't have nice things to say about it
Vin man just created a fundamentally
sick environment and I think he still is
running the company to this day
why before this episode starts I have a
small favor to ask from you two months
ago 74% of people that watched this
channel didn't subscribe we're now down
to
69% my goal is 50% so if you've ever
liked any of the videos we've posted if
you like this channel can you do me a
quick favor and hit the Subscribe button
it helps this channel more than you know
and the bigger the channel gets as
you've seen the bigger the guests get
thank you and enjoy this
[Music]
episode wonda when I interview people I
often ask them to tell me the most sort
of pertinent first event in their story
that went on to shape who they are and
with you from reading through your story
it's quite clear that the first
potentially significant event happened
as you were being
born yeah I uh I was born with the UL
cord around my neck and uh I was like a
zero on the epar scale which is like the
health of a baby when they're born I was
blue like thought I was dead um had to
it took a while to revive me and um I
had uh some damage from that um some
neurological damage which expressed
itself as a motor speech disorder called
proxia which is basically I would have
words formed in my head and try to say
say it but there was kind of Disconnect
between my brain and my mouth and it
would come out differently than how I
said it so um ended up having to do many
years of speech therapy to be able to
get over it and sometimes I uh I
struggle a little bit but uh um I've
I've you know dealt with it well enough
where people don't notice but uh you
know doing things like pro wrestling
promos and stuff where everybody like
will uh scrutinize you for like saying a
single syllable or you know not
producing every single not pronouncing
every single word per perfectly like if
I just stuttered like I did just now or
mispronounced something like I did just
now in a wrestling promo I would be like
hung over it and so um you know there's
little things like that that still
Express themselves to this day but
mostly it's not noticeable now the
umbilical cord was wrapped around your
neck the doctors gave you a zero out of
10 in terms of your health when you were
a baby what age did you learn to speak
properly um I didn't really speak like
in full intelligible sentences until I
was like around 5 or so when they did
brain scans did they notice anything
different in your brain at that point
because of your because of the umbilical
cord incident no no one ever like did a
brain scan or anything like that I got
tested for deafness for a long time
autism um aoia didn't exist as a
diagnosis until after I'd kind of really
gotten over it um it was actually like a
a like a fan a mom and her daughter that
uh brought me like a pamphlet and was
like we've heard your story it's been so
inspirational to us we think what you
had is this thing called a proxia and um
and I was like oh my God this actually
fits everything that we experiened
perfectly and uh we ended up having a
walk for a proxy here I got to like meet
a bunch of different kids and stuff that
were dealing with similar things but
yeah it's kind of like newer on uh on in
the field people being aware of it but I
think that's what made me um delve into
sport so much because um you know with
Judo especially you like communicate
physically with a person you have to put
your hands on another person you have to
talk and interact with that person and
so when I was having a hard time uh when
we moved back to LA like really
socializing with other kids sports you
know specifically Judo made it like kind
of it was like a conduit for me to be
able to like connect with other kids and
have something to talk about what was
home life like for you before the age of
10 I mean I thought everything was
perfect and awesome uh my my dad passed
when I was eight though and um I didn't
know but he had broken his back in a
suing accident when we'd first moved to
North Dakota and um he had like a rare
blood disorder where he couldn't heal
from it and so um he had been receiving
uh diagnoses basically saying he'd
become like a paraplegic in the then a
quadriplegic could eventually die and um
we didn't know that he was going through
this or dealing with chronic pain or
anything like that so he ended up taking
his life when he was when when I was
eight but he'd been going through that
for years but had kept it from us and
so then like my kind of my whole world
turned upside down and then my mom ended
up re remarrying a couple years later
and then when I was around 10 11 is when
we moved to um right in the border of
San mon Venice your father had a
sledding accident he he's told that he's
going to be a quadriplegic soon yes at
some point he broke his back and um his
disease called bardar syndrome makes it
difficult to clot your blood it's like a
platelet you know your platelets are Mal
malformed and uh so he wasn't able to
heal basically and uh they put a rod in
his back to try and help it heal but his
spine was just crumbling away so his
spine was basically like falling apart
he died by Suicide yeah he uh he said he
didn't want his our last memories of him
to be a laying in a bed with tubes
running in and out of him he was in a
lot of pain all the time but didn't like
being you know doped up on painkiller so
he just wanted to go out his own
way did you have any idea that he was
suffering at that time none at
all completely kept it from
us so so one minute he's there and and
then the next minute he's not
yeah how did you find out that he had
died by
Suicide um my mom told me right you know
right after it
happened how how how does a mother
explain that to an 8-year-old
child I mean she's a PhD in educational
psychology so very you know technically
I guess you know she just kind of laid
laid the facts out of this is what
happened and this is what's going on and
we wanted to keep it from you cuz uh she
said that my dad just wanted us to be
kids and not have to worry about it she
told you the details of his his suicide
yeah what impact does that have on you
um I mean in the long run I felt like it
just kind of gave me this feeling that
even if I feel like everything is okay
that everything can come crashing down
at any moment
and uh I guess I like lost any feeling
of security of even when everything's
going great I feel like like the ball's
about to drop you know and
um that's something that I had to like
you know work through till this day and
I feel like mostly I'm I can feel pretty
secure with my life and where I'm at but
yeah it plagued me for a long time you
were close to him yeah I was Big Time
Daddy's girl yeah but part of the speech
therapy was that my sisters were talking
for me and so
uh he had to work uh a little bit of a
drive from the house so he would be um
in Devil's Lake during the week and we'd
come home to my not on the weekends and
so um the speech therapist said I just
spend one-on-one time with a parent so
that I'm forced to speak so my sisters
can't translate my gibberish for me and
so we would it'd be me and him during
the week and we'd come home on the
weekend so he was like you know my whole
world it's um it's almost done
imaginable for an 8-year-old to try and
process that in reality and like the
because I think at 8 years old you don't
understand the concept of suicide or why
you know why a human could die by
Suicide and at that age what is the
story you you tell yourself in the book
you talk you talk about how you would
tell yourself that he's going he's just
gone away on business and that he's
going to return at some point yeah well
that's the only time that he would
really be gone away from the house for
extended periods of times cuz he had
like a business trip or something and so
that was just kind of like what I told
myself to cope for for a while but then
I found out later that uh my grandfather
committed suicide as well so he was a
second generation
suicide your siblings and your mother
the impact of the loss on your dad on
them was that noticeable did you notice
a change in
them my my like sister didn't ever
really want to talk talk about it and I
I think you know my
uh yeah no one really wanted to talk
about it at all it wasn't like the kind
of thing that we would bring up all the
time your mother at this time she's um a
champion in her own right yeah in
everything she um got a perfect score on
the SATs at 16 graduated college at
19 um then she won the World
Championships in Judo the first American
to ever win the World Championships in
Judo while she was working as a single
mother engineer and getting her PhD in
educational psychology wow yeah she's
incredible she when I was reading about
her and doing some research on her she
sounds like a little bit of a superwoman
so I went and found um I wanted to see
her and I found this picture of
her y That's mom she looks like a badass
bad she was the original armar lady she
uh actually tore her knees out when she
was 17 and had to learn how to win
basically just on the ground so um
she was the one that would always win by
armar oh really yeah and she was kind of
like taught me how she did it and you
know I add added to and learned things
as well but it's become like kind of a
family heirloom as the armar
yeah the family
armar I I often think that um our
childhoods and those sort of early
formative experiences and the traumas
that we experience they leave
fingerprints on us in various ways that
follow us for the rest of our lives um
for good for bad bad and sometimes for
ugly when you think about those sort of
first 10 years of your life and the
fingerprints it left on you as an adult
and the person that sits in front of me
today what are those things that are um
most sort of ingrained in you from that
time of your life what's most ingrained
in me from being a
kid um well I think like you know like
losing a parent is a huge format of
event have you ever read a blink by
Malcolm Gladwell no but I've spoken to
him on the podcast but no I haven't yeah
he mentions that uh that kids that lose
a parent before they're 10 actually end
up being uh more successful
statistically later in life and uh it's
like well he he's the one that delved
into into his book but um you know when
I was reading I'm like oh you know I I
could see I could see that that makes
sense in a way and um the the aoia and
stuff like really pushing me towards
Sports and like being physical and and
things like that and being the youngest
of the sisters so you know I was the one
that was that getting beat on at the
house so it made me tougher and want to
constantly be able to like prove myself
as you know not just being a little baby
but deserving of respect and stuff like
that and those kind of like made me into
um the kind of kid that would when I
first started swimming I wanted to win
the Olympics and swimming when I first
started Judo I was like I just still
want to win the Olympics in this now and
um but that was just how encouraging my
parents were you know if they're like oh
you want to swim you're going to you can
win the Olympics and swimming you know
and so I was just always fed that
expectation that I could do everything
and at sort of 10 years old you moved to
Santa Monica um and you had your
first attempt and try at Judo is that
right yeah I um well I was swimming
here but I wasn't so much into swimming
it's kind of
boring and uh I didn't like waking up in
the morning and jumping in a cold pool I
didn't blame me yeah so after a little
bit of that I was like h
I want to do something else and my mom
uh she trained here in the 80s back when
she did Judo and so she went to go visit
a bunch of her old teammates that had
all gone and opened up clubs of their
own and I went and tried it and I
remember my first day I didn't even have
a hair tie my hair was all over the
place crazy and I was like trying to
figure out how to do Judo and uh I had
the most fun that I ever had cuz I love
that there was no one way to do it if it
you know if it worked it was right and
it was kind of like mentally intriguing
you have to figure it out you're like
solving a puzzle or like having a
conversation with the other person you
know and so um because it was so like
mentally engaging I think that's why I
liked it so much and uh uh when I won my
first tournament I got that feeling of
winning that I didn't quite get in in
swimming I was one of the top kids in
the state but I wouldn't like really win
swimming meets and so um first time I
won something I got like addicted to
that feeling I guess so I actually
dropped out of school when I was 16 to
be able to train and do Judo full-time
and move away from home to train
full-time what was your mother's opinion
on you doing Judo seeing as she was a a
champion in Judo herself when her
daughter turns around and says mom I
want to do Judo
too um I mean I can't really say how she
felt but I mean I was kind of like
identified as being like a prodigy of
Judo pretty young and uh
she wanted to kind of take an outside
role of making sure that I was training
with all the right people at the right
time she wasn't the person that was on
like she of course taught me everything
that that she could and um but she
didn't really want to be that
overbearing coach Mom on the match you
more of like was like you go here train
with this person you go here train with
that person was like the overarching
like architect of my career and
everything like that you um you went to
your first tournament and you win the
tournament with instant wins ions I
don't know what an ion is but ion is
like if you throw someone flat on their
back okay right so you win that first
tournament people start considering you
to be this child prodigy in Judo what
was it about when you look back on
yourself now with all the wisdom you
have what was it about you that made you
Excel above your peers Judo what was it
about your character something that you
did uh I mean there had to be some sort
of genetic Factor cuz like my mom and my
dad are both like good athletes um but I
think yeah part of it was personality
wise but I just really wanted to win I
had that I cared why I mean winning felt
good but I also it really hurt for me to
lose I hated like my first tournament I
lost I like locked myself in a room for
like a week I was so upset but I was
willing to get my heart broken I was
willing to care about something so much
that my heart would be broken if I
didn't you know achieve it and I don't
know I think I felt like the idea of
being better at something than everybody
else like made me special somehow it was
like proof and it was also it wasn't
like I was dragging myself through doing
it to be great at something because
that's what it was I I really enjoyed
like mastering the art of Judo like
figuring it out it was like endlessly
intriguing to me at the time and I
remember when I was
16 I like realized while I was you know
doing nawaza which is fighting on the
ground that the end of one move was the
beginning have another one and that's
when I moov from like trying to memorize
all these separate techniques to trying
to um combine them into like a path and
like a web and I um I didn't come up and
you know naaza and Judo is not the focus
of the sport really um maybe it's like
20% of the time people spend on the
ground maybe less but it wasn't like
Gracie Jiu-Jitsu where they like show
you like oh this is the way and this is
the structure and I was very open-ended
and so I was kind of like I had to
create like my own like system basically
my own fighting style and everything
like that and that was I think the most
interesting to me that I was like
creating a philosophy and everything and
Concepts and how how did I piece
everything together and so um I think
that was the most interesting part I I
could train for hours and hours and
hours and hours and not realize that I'm
tired because I'm trying to piece
something together um but I also I think
we call it like opposite add where I
like fixate on things for like hours on
end and I can't get off of it and uh but
if you tell me to like run you know I'm
like oh my God the whole time I'm like
okay I'm tired I'm tired I'm more tired
than I was but if you tell me like if I
had to try and figure out how to like do
a certain punch a certain right way or
do a certain throw a certain right way I
would do it for hours on end trying to
get it absolutely perfect and not
realize all that time had passed so and
sometimes that's like a negative thing
or I'll fix dat on something like
something stupid I did like several
years ago and not be able to stop myself
from thinking about it but it's also the
same thing that would keep me training
on a single technique for hours on end
just trying to get it right and my mom
said when I was a kid I would draw the
same picture over and over and over
again I would I remember it was like a
bunny in the middle and there was like a
bush a bush and a tree and a tree and
each side and like a sun with the cool
glasses right my mom would be like what
why do you keep drawing this picture
over and over thousands of times I would
draw the same drawing
and uh she said my answer was that I'm
just trying to get it to match the
picture in my head I couldn't understand
why when I thought of a bunny and a
bushes and all this stuff and I drew it
it didn't look exactly like a bunny and
so I would keep drawing it over and over
and over again to try and get it and uh
I guess that's like you know my
personality I guess it's something that
I can't really control for For Better or
For Worse and is that perfectionism is
that how You' kind of Define that this
sort of obsessive um
pursuit of making the thing perfect as
you see it I don't think it's so much
perfectionism as it is Mastery I want to
like master and understand something
completely it's kind of like an
unfinished puzzle you
know cuz I can live in squalor like I
don't think like the perfectionism of
everything around me is really uh um so
so important but yeah being able to to
understand something completely is
something that nags me if I don't
completely understand it I have to like
keep going back to it big jimm you go
and train with big Jim at 16 years old
you leave home at 16 years old and go
and train with big Jim who's Big Jim and
why did you go and live with him what
for eight months roughly oh God mean on
and off for like years I was up there
um uh well Big Jim was one of the best
coaches in the country and he trained
his son little Jimmy who had just won
the 1999 World Championship as in Judo
and um I know Judo is not that big in
the US so the places that are good at it
and have good coaches and good people to
train with are few and far between and
um Pedro's Judo was one of those
places yeah leaving home at 16 is
um is unusual to say the least yeah what
impact did that have on you it was tough
it was hard I remember being homesick a
lot um I was really isolating you know I
uh all I did was train all day there
wasn't any other kids my age I was
always around people older than me um
you know part of being like a sport
Prodigy is no one your age is on your
level you know so I was always training
with people older I also at the same
time felt like I was in the middle of my
Montage to do something like amazing you
know my um I thought I was going to
shock the world and be the first
American to win the gold medal in Judo
at 17 and so no it was worth it to me
and at this time you're 16 you're you
have your first experience with what we
call
bulimia you talk about this in the book
where because of the pressure for to
make way almost every week you struggled
with bulimia for the first time can you
what do I need to understand about that
because I I don't understand what bimar
is in my in Full full entirety but I
also don't understand the circumstances
that would lead a 16-year-old to make
decisions
to that would be categorized as Bic
um well basically I had to be await on a
deadline very often and it's not really
a weight that I could healthily stay at
and so I would have to cut weight to get
there and um I just it started to give
me like a really unhealthy relationship
with food where I would like hoard food
while I was cutting weight like candy
bars and stuff like that and then after
I made weight I would like Gorge myself
on it like I didn't know any I didn't
have any um resources to help me out
with it and so uh it just kind of
spiraled into a
disorder and that sort of would mean um
throwing up your food after you to eaten
it on occasion
MH yep I remember the first time I did
it was uh I had like a childhood coach
or something took me out one day and he
like basically like forced me to have a
chocolate shake and he was like no you
got to have a chocolate shake come on
it's fine you train it all the time you
need to relax you have a chocolate shake
and I felt like so guilty about the
chocolate shake that I and I had to be
like make weight or something like that
weekend or something I there's no way I
would be able to make it and so like uh
I made myself throw up the chocolate
shake and it was actually like it was it
was cold it didn't hurt it was that bad
you know and I was like oh well it's
that wasn't even that terrible and so uh
I thought it was like a one time thing
but the next time I like ate two to much
and I felt like really guilty about it
it just became like you know the panic
button of if I ate too much and I had a
deadline coming up where I had to be a
certain weight I felt like it was the
only thing I could do and I was a little
girl that was growing you know I like
grew 4 in and like doubled my weight in
a short period of time and so I just
couldn't stay at a lower weight so um
but you have all this outside pressure
to be able to maintain the the same way
even though as an athlete you're growing
and putting on muscle and even getting
taller so it was kind of like fighting
nature I read in your book that they
called you
missman yeah in school it wasn't cool
for you know little girls to be muscular
back then and so uh before I dropped out
at 16 you know I
uh I was really muscular and um people
would like grab at my arms and make fun
of me all the time to the point that I
would just kind of like I would wear a
zipup hoodie all the time no matter how
hot I was I always Tred to like cover up
my arms or how muscular I was which is
one reason why when I got older that
trying to like fight that that uh idea
that being muscular or was masculine was
something that became important to me
because that you know if you were a
teenage girl in the early
2000s it was a a pretty unhealthy
standard that was presented to us so
yeah I uh I didn't fit the the very
narrow scope of what was considered
attractive at that that time and um and
now it's like considered like really
cool for you know women to have muscles
now all the model models have like
stomach definition and stuff like that
and like are doing boxing and all this
stuff and want to look toned but um that
that wasn't the case back and that
wasn't the case back then that was
something that I got teased for a lot by
18 you leave home and you go off to um
you leave home as you say because you
felt like you wanted to have some
control over your life um and I think
you on route to the Olympics at this
point you were thinking about going to
the Olympics at 21 years old you
actually competed in the Beijing
Olympics and were the first American
women to get an Olympic
medal and then what I found really
shocking is that you made $6,000 from
from winning that medal at the Olympics
yeah after I got taxed on it $1,000 and
got taxed on it actually bitched about
it so much in the media when I was doing
MMA that they got rid of that tax but
still you would only get
$110,000 is there like a bit of a
through line in your story that starts
very young about this idea of um the
importance of validation and respect
from other people this kind of bit of a
chip on your shoulder that was driving
you yeah I think it it started out of
something that drove me and then it
ended up being something that held me
back that I had to kind of shake myself
from but you know I also benefited
greatly from it so I'm not saying I
regret anything but I know that it
wasn't like a sustainable model for for
me to you know be happy in the long run
CU I spoke to Tim Grover who trained
LeBron and um Kobe and he said the same
thing to me he said you know when he's
talking about Kobe and all those years
training him to To Be A Champion that
our dark side and our light light side
are interconnected when he's talking
about our Dark Side he's basically
saying like the trauma the the difficult
things about us the things that we would
probably keep in the shadow if we could
um they end up creating the greatness
that we see on our screens and it's like
you can't separate out the two you can't
just have this person and not this
person unfortunately but like he he
makes the case to me that we all have a
dark side and unfortunately it's it as I
say it's responsible for our light side
I I see that throughout your story this
sort of Journey to understanding that
part of you and as you say in your book
like liberating yourself from it um
which is really interesting because I
feel like I've been through this trying
to been I've been trying to do the same
thing in my life I've been trying to
take back the control of some of it
because as you said there it can lead
you to the top of the mountain and then
it can sometimes bring you down the
other side or it can make you miserable
at the top of the mountain I think I had
to get to the top of several mountains
to realize that like the mountain
climbing wasn't really going to be what
made me happy and I had this idea that
if I like if I collected or hoarded
achievements that somehow well someday
they would all add up to happiness that
I would be able to like I did this thing
so now I could be happy forever like my
idea was if I'm like the first American
to win the Olympic
in Judo then I will be happy for the
rest of my life and it's not it it it
didn't really work like that like I
could yeah achieve these great things
and it would make me happy for a time
but your life goes on past that and so I
kind of had to um figure out after
hoarding all these bucket list
experiences that um that I would
actually end up just forgetting at times
like someone had to remind me the other
day remember when you flew with the
Thunderbirds I'm like oh yeah
and and then and then they didn't equate
to to the actual happiness and I had to
um I thought that if I like could make
my past into something that i' I'd done
all these great things that it would it
would dictate my future but I had to
kind of figure out that like making
myself happy with every day that I'm wi
that that I'm living individually is
what I needed to do and there's no
amount of accomplishments that you can
like add to you know your your trophy
shelf that are going to acquaint to
being happy forever in the future it
just it just is impossible and it sounds
like you you were living with a bit of a
secret throughout your sort of early MMA
career and the fact that you had what
appeared to be a bit of a concussion
based brain injury of sorts because in
your book you talk about how you realize
that in inspiring if someone hit you
pretty hard in the head you'd end up
seeing
Stars yeah I mean I people didn't really
know about CTE back when I was doing
Judo and um I get concussions all the
time and just be told that you know hey
I my head hurts I have photo Vision I
would say it like stuff like that and
then' be like just stop being a [__]
and like keep training and so um I would
get you know dozens and dozens of
concussions and never be allowed to stop
and I would have to keep training
through them and the symptoms would
persist for weeks so the point that I
was experiencing concussion symptoms
more often than I wasn't for 10year Judo
career I mean that's the kind of thing
that like you know leads to CTE all
these football players that we we're
dealing with were having concussions
repeatedly and not being allowed to rest
and so by the time I got into MMA like
this is the kind of injury that
accumulates over time you don't you know
it doesn't go away every time you get a
concussion it's easier to get another
one and so by the time I got into MMA I
um it was really easy for me to to get
concussion symptoms and um i' I'd rested
for a couple years you know so at first
it wasn't so bad but it it just got
worse and worse and worse with time even
if I'm winning a fight and you know 14
seconds and the other person doesn't
touch me there's uh 50 rounds of
sparring that went into that training
camp and you're wearing like a headgear
and gloves which are meant to protect
you cosmetically but these gloves are 14
ounces and you're wearing this head gear
so your brain is you know suspended in
fluid the the larger the thing is like
it's a 14 o ounces it's easier actually
to give you a concussion um when you're
sparring and it's the kind of thing that
I just didn't want to like say anything
about you know I didn't want and I
didn't want to address it myself or any
kind of weakness in myself and I just
kept telling myself that I you know I
just have to be perfect and not allow
these people to touch me I have to
create this fighting style that's so
efficient
that I don't take any damage and um it
got to a point where I fought Sarah
McMahon and she barely tapped me and I
obviously had a concussion afterward I
couldn't bear to look at the lights I
had to have everyone turn the lights off
and
um I was looking for a way out you know
cuz I know I couldn't sustain that
forever um but yeah it's got to it got
to the point where if I got like tapped
at all um with the you know said the
point say Stephanie McMahon slapped me
and gave me a concussion you know and uh
the you know a woman
then that has never been a fighter in
her life and even you know is uh passed
her slapping Prime if she can slap me
across the face and give me a concussion
you know I shouldn't be fighting anymore
did you keep this a secret I had to keep
it a secret from everybody um my coaches
Dana even like myself I just didn't want
to face face up to it I just thought
thought that I could keep it going
forever and
so that like I think was the most
frustrating thing to me that like in
my uh my first loss I got tapped in the
beginning and I'd fallen down the stairs
a week or so like maybe a week or so
before that knocked myself out falling
down the stairs at my house and then
didn't say anything went into the fight
anyway had a horrible weight cut had the
wrong mouth guard with that which didn't
have the protection on the back of the
bottom teeth
so the first time she Taps me my teeth
get knocked loose and I'm out on my feet
like when I say out on my feet it means
that like like I have no I have no depth
depth perception basically and I'm at a
very limited capacity of what my brain
can
um the information that it could give me
and so I knew that if she knew that I
was hurt I wouldn't be able to defend
myself and so I had to keep
coming forward without knowing how far
away she was and not being fully you
know hold of my facilities just to keep
them the fight going hoping that I would
recover but I just couldn't and so I
think that that's one of the things
that really dug like dug at me for so
long that so many people were like
saying like oh Rhonda's game plan was
bad or whatever this and like they
didn't know that like I wasn't like
present I I was like just trying to
survive I couldn't see how far away she
was I
um it wasn't like that was my game plan
or anything like that I was like
completely disabled and uh when I tried
to fight again and I was like okay I
give myself a break and I'll make sure
the mouth goge is perfect and this time
I'm not going to knock myself out right
before the fight and all those things
and the same thing I just got tapped and
I was I was out you know even if I was
out on my feet I was
out so I just like just didn't have the
hardware to continue fighting and a lot
of people would say like oh you're a
[__] quitter you're this this or that
and and it's really difficult because i'
never had been more skilled as a fighter
I'd never been better in my life but I
just you know I just neurologically
wasn't capable of continuing it to fight
at that level and I couldn't say
anything about it then because I wanted
to go and do pro wrestling and they
already have their own controversy that
they had to deal with with uh wrestlers
having you know CTE all kinds of damage
from concussions and so it's such a
volatile subject that I
just I couldn't say anything about it
and I couldn't say anything about it
leading into my my my last fight because
then I'd be basically telling the other
person that um you know the putting a
Target on my head literally so I just
had to stay silent about it for years
and let people make their their own
assumptions about me and um you know it
was it was tough because like
in some ways like I've never been better
as a fighter I've never had a better
grasp of everything than I ever had I'd
never been faster stronger everything
else but you know you only have so many
hits that you can take and unfortunately
I took the vast majority of them as a
kid doing
Judo I want to make sure I completely
understand the context of the what it's
like to get a concussion and to live
with a concussion that ends up
compounding to make it even more
sensitive you you you take those big
hits when you're younger they they ask
you to fight through the concussion by
the time you're in the UFC you've
developed this incredible style where
you basically get people out of there
instantly I mean in the leading up to
your fight with Amanda Holmes I think I
remember the commentator saying at the
time that you'd knocked or you'd
submitted everyone within sort of 30
seconds of the fight starting so your
your style had kind of adapted to become
I'm going to get this person out of
there immediately that yeah that wasn't
an accident that was the goal that was
the goal the goal was I had to be able
to finish the person off immediately
because that was the only way that I
could fight is to not take any damage
because if they had hit you in the head
at that point there was a risk that you
you would get a concussion and you were
aware of that risk but your coaches
weren't no were any of your coaches
aware of it no was Edmund aware of it
yourbody I didn't tell anybody I didn't
it was one of those things I just didn't
want to
like face up to that to having any
weakness in myself and also like like
Edan would have made me stop I didn't
want to stop I didn't want anyone to be
making that decision for me I didn't
wanted to tell the company that I was
having neurological symptoms cuz then
they wouldn't let me continue to fight I
didn't want those decisions to be taken
out of my
hands in your book you talk about the
relationship you had with Edmund and it
wasn't always great in terms of his
approach to coaching you talk about how
he would physically strike you during
training but more potentially even more
he would emotionally abuse you during
training I mean
honestly I
can't think of single coach
that I had like a great like a like a
great relationship with like this is
like a lot of the coaches were of that
like Bella Cori kind of generation of
like they thought that being abusive to
the athletes is what gave them the best
result and that was kind of what was
like in Vogue at the time so
um and like that as an athlete you're
just kind of like all right well this is
what I have to deal with in order to be
the best and especially with like
these these Sports where you have no
other choice like this is the national
team coach and you have to get their
approval and put up their [__] to be
able to to fight at this level and so
like Edmund
was I think not as bad as previous
coaches so that's why I um put up with a
lot cuz I felt like I at least had a say
that I could I could talk back the other
coaches would just you know um like
little Jimmy my first coach literally
like dislocated my jaw as I was a little
kid I threw him once in front of
everybody and and laughed because I
thought it was awesome and he threw me
on the benches on top of the table at
everybody else's in front of all these
people and uh you know Big Jim had like
grabbed me by the throat before to like
drive his point home that women can't
defend themselves and so this is like
behavior that I've been conditioned to
tolerate since I was like a little
girl and um Edmund was of that same like
Eastern European kind of like school of
thought of like you have to be like
really tough and in order to bring the
best out of people and um what does that
do to your emotions though because we
develop you know at the age when most of
us are developing our emotions you're
having yours suppressed and you're being
made into this really quote unquote
tough
person I think it kind of taught me from
a young age to just
like how to diffuse like coaches that
were like getting out of hand and to not
because if I st stood up for myself it
would just make it worse and so it just
kind of like taught me to like okay I
got to like get this person in a good
mood all the time or I had to like
butter them up or I have to like
strategically find my way to like out
out of being bered or something like
that and so um I think it's not so much
one individual that's a huge problem I
think like the whole system is the
problem and that it really reinforces
these like in these power IM balances
that are um inevitably taken advantage
of that all these coaches have free
reign of their little their little
foms and
um a lot of these athletes don't have
any other option and so like I don't see
how like in school you can have like a
teacher someone comes in to watch the
teacher teach to grade them on their
teaching like nobody does this for
coaching and you know so I would hear
these stories about like these Sumo
coaches that like would kill their
Athletes Training them and I'd be like
yeah you know I could see how that going
happen and it's just it's it's not one
person it's not one sport it's
everywhere and there's
like I can't say that I have all the
answers for it but I can say that like
coaching in general creates a really
like unhealthy power like in inbalance
that what I was
able how I was able to take my
relationship with my coach Edmund and
take it from off the rails back on track
is to to have very distinct boundaries
you know a lot of times your coach is
someone that you're you know is tough on
you but they're also like they care
about you they're a parent they're a
brother they're they're a coach too but
a lot of times it it becomes like an
overbearing family member and a coach
and you can't be both that's why my mom
didn't want to be my coach she didn't
want to have to be my mom and my coach
because being both of those at the same
time is inevitably
unhealthy and
when we put boundaries in place of like
okay this is what your job is and you do
not do anything outside of that
then you know I training was better than
ever our relationship was better than
ever but I think like a lot of these
lines and these boundaries get blurred
and they need to be very you know very
defined in order for for it to work out
and how were those Lines Blurred with
your coach um just just
he was crossing them in terms of the
things he was able to say and do yeah I
mean a lot of it was like he just wanted
to know where I was all the time and um
like I needed to be constantly available
and and stuff like that and uh or else
it would like end up turning into like a
big argument or something like that and
I would just end up just trying to like
do anything I could to not get in an
argument and
um but yeah like I had to like make a
rule at one point I was like you're not
allowed to FaceTime me cuz I don't want
you to just FaceTime me and know where I
am at all times and what I'm doing cuz
like it's my [__] business it's my
privacy and it was just he was always
trying to push that
boundary um now was always pushing back
and stuff like that and um but I was
like I don't know I A lot of times I
like I'm like I just want to train like
I don't I would be just trying to like
plate him because if I like just stopped
talking to him and an argument then it
would end up leaking into training the
next day and so it just became like
really like taxing of like my my energy
in general but like I mean I can't
really think of a single like coach
relationship that I that I had that was
like perfect but it worked you know
that's the one problem that I'd always
had like debating I'm like well it's
working I'm getting better and so you
would just put up with it because
there's there was no perfect option out
there you said at the very start that
you were very very close to your father
and then when your father the past these
other men that almost take on what
someone could like into a fatherly role
are all
coaches yeah yeah no I mean they were
all like uh what was it in in Kill Bill
that was talking about uh that bill lost
his father early so he collected father
figures yeah I collected them um none of
them were as good as the
original but yeah I think that that
constant need for you know um validation
from a father fig it was something that
I was constantly like pursuing but um
you know that like that philosophy of
coaching of you
know you see like the like the Russian
figure skaters the gymnast that never
smile because they've been like beaten
into iron that was basically the
philosophy of all the coaches that I had
they would see someone like B coroli and
be like oh my God like he was their Idol
and so they're all trying to like
emulate that beating the emotion out of
you this is something that I that I've
always wondered about you because you
you've always had a
Steely um
exterior you know no you have especially
when in the in the fight in the UFC days
I watched some of you your Clips to
remind myself of your fighting days
before this and you know that you came
in with that face that that face and um
just in interviews around that time and
so on and this is why I asked the
question about emotion and how as
because you got into this at such a
young age and you're dealing with these
men who call you you know you're lack
lacking discipline if you miss weight
and all of these kinds of things
um you go through that the loss of your
father the unprocessed grief I'm
wondering what happens to Ronda Rousey's
relationship with her own emotions I
mean I was always really emotional
actually as a fighter I would cry on the
mat all the time all the time I I cried
on the mat like every practice for years
straight and I would get yelled at for
crying you get yelled at for crying I
yelled at for crying so I would cry and
then I would cry because I was crying
and I would cry because I was being
yelled at for crying and um yeah I just
uh but it wouldn't be because something
hurt it would because you know something
I was frustrated by something I couldn't
I got thrown or I couldn't make
something work I was trying to make work
and I would cry out of frustration and
my uh mom said I had a tournament where
it was full double elimination so I
ended up winning the tournament but I
lost a match earlier in the day and
every single match I would come out
crying bow in throw the other girl on
her ass beat her bow out crying come
into the next match still crying beat
the [__] out of the other girl B out
crying the whole day crying until I beat
everybody beat the same girl that beat
me twice in order to win on top of the
podium number one crying still because I
lost that first match earlier in the day
and so yeah I was always very
emotional I was extremely emotional as a
fighter and in training and everything
like that and that was something I was
constantly trying to like battle was
like if you get thrown in a tournament
don't start crying because that was just
something that would happen to me all
the time very yeah and that it's so
funny people think that I'm like yeah
this emotionalist robot whatever I fight
it took a long time to to be able to get
there to stop like crying in the middle
of a match wow yeah Dana says he's never
going to allow women into the UFC to
fight but then Dana changes his mind and
he changes his mind because of you
effectively so in September 2012 I
remember the I remember it very fondly I
remember where I was when I watched the
first um woman fight in the UFC Dana
says that he's signing the first ever
woman fighter in the UFC lady called
Ronda Rousey and despite saying a year
earlier that he wouldn't but he called
you a game changer and so you did end up
changing the game and you became UFC
champion between 2022 and
2015 you won 15 fights back to back most
of them finished within seconds you
stacked up a bunch of records including
the fastest ever win fastest submission
fastest title defense
turnaround and you were voted the best
female athlete of all time in a 2015 PN
fan pole and Fox Sports called you one
of the defining athletes of the 21st
century part of that sort of 15 fights
back to back was you know when I think
about that period is the amount of times
you were fighting was really unusual
you're fighting I think there sometimes
you're fighting three times in nine
months which is kind of unheard of for
anyone in the UFC I mean there's
Fighters today that seem to just fight
once a year why were you doing that why
were you fighting so frequently I was
fighting that frequently because that's
how often Dana called and I told him
that you no if you sign me I will be
there to fight whenever you need me and
I never said no and so anytime that I
got an offer or anytime one of the guys
got hurt or fell out I was always the
one that would fill in and um you know
if there was like a I always fought on
like uh Fe like februaries and augusts
and November like the worst times of the
years is to fight because that's when
they needed somebody to come in and pick
up the numbers so I wasn't somebody like
like holding out to only fight on the
fourth of July card or New Year's card
which are the best you know viewer um
the highest view of the year I um I
would do whatever was best for the
company because that's what I promised
the role that I would fulfill that was
like the deal that I made when I came in
and um you know nobody else has to do
that but I felt like I I owed it to Dana
I I I promised him I would be there
anytime that he needed me and I was if
you could go back and give yourself
advice on that day when you signed your
UFC contract now you could time travel
back to that Ronda and give her a little
bit of advice whisper in a what would
you say I wouldn't change anything you
wouldn't change anything time travel is
not possible and I led myself to where I
am now and I'm happy with where I'm at
so I wouldn't [__] with it when you got
the news that you're going to be signing
for the UFC as the first ever woman to
fight in the
UFC how did how did that feel um
validating really yeah and I was just
really excited I just felt like I was in
on a secret that the whole world didn't
know and they were just starting to find
out and throughout that period while you
were the UFC champion you take up acting
and you you feature in a couple of films
like the Fast and Furious The
Expendables Etc was that something that
you always had planned or is that
something that just arose as an
opportunity uh the movie stuff just kind
of arose as an opportunity um but you
know once it became a possibility I was
like of course I could be the next Bruce
Lee you know of course I could do great
at this and um uh I felt like I was good
like performer and you know great
physical performer as well and I could
combine the two in a way that nobody
else could so I went after it with the
same kind of confidence I went after
everything on the 14th of November 2015
you had UFC 193 where you were lined up
to fight Holly Holmes in Melbourne
Australia I remember where I was when
that fight happened I I didn't miss many
UFC fights and I still don't miss many
but it was a really sort of um a huge
turning point for a number of reasons
you were
indestructible basically that's how the
whole UFC community and I think the fan
base saw you but in that moment as you
said earlier on there was an initial
contact and I watched the clip again
earlier on there's an initial contact I
think it was with um Holly holm's elbow
if if I can't remember if I remember
correctly and then you talked about
having this sort of issue with dep death
percept depth perception because of that
initial contact and that's actually what
I see in that clip I see from that first
sort of strike that there is an issue
with kind of understanding where where
um Holly is and that fight ends in a
head kick from that moment when you
leave the O the
Octagon how does how does your life and
perception of everything change because
it's interesting the way that you were
built up to that you were I was going to
say the top of the mountain and you up
in the clouds at that point like it was
it was framed to everyone that you were
fundamentally indestructible
you know and that's kind of what the
marketing machine does it does to
everyone they're fundamentally
indestructible but to everyone with from
mamad Ali to my friend Israel um in the
UFC everyone has their day where we find
out that everyone is a human being to
some degree from the moment you leave
the UFC what is life like from that
point onwards when you get back into the
medical
room um extremely
depressing you know that was my whole
identity was uh uh being champion and
defeated and um it's just like Soul
crushing really was it was I was just
kind of like forced to face music before
I was ready to and I knew that
um it was going to catch up to me at
some point but I was
more think upset that there were so many
people out there that were like reveling
in
it and um
and I don't know it just felt so like
unjust in a way because I just felt like
it was
just there's so much of it it just
wasn't my fault you know I just couldn't
like my brain just couldn't take what I
asked of it anymore and my body took as
much as it could until it literally
broke and I gave everybody everything
that I had and
um and that wasn't enough for them they
they hated me for not having
more so I mean it was tough it was um I
saw a whole bunch of people that I
thought were friends just you know turn
on me and
um it was uh really eye opening in a way
though you know
to who TR who had CH who to who true
friends are and what is what true
happiness is and that outward validation
wasn't it
and so I think maybe he might have saved
me in a way from going down the path of
trying to like chase that high of
everybody's you know approval
forever but um so I guess it was
liberating in a way in the long run if I
was a fly on the wall that night when
you left that octagon what would I have
seen a lot of
crying you
know
um I had to get my lip sewed up the
muscle underneath and then the the
skin I remember I was so out of it that
I like bit off a chunk of my lip and
spit it out like it was like a piece of
chap like you know like a chapped lip
like that's how out of it I was I was
biting and Che like spinning out chunks
of like fles in my lip and people
judging me for the decisions I was
making while while in that state I think
is what bothered me the most it wasn't
so much that I lost it was just that
people thought that I didn't know how to
fight and um you know if I was at my
full capacity I don't think anyone could
ever beat me but I
just you know I was
spent I I was running on fumes for so
long that I didn't have any fumes left
and
um and the moment that I ran out of
fumes was um you know broadcast live to
billions of people everywhere who all
had their own assumptions about it and
none of them are right and I felt like I
couldn't speak up or say anything and on
honestly like whoever I tried to talk to
they didn't care
about um helping me communicate what I
was trying to communicate they just
cared about getting as many clicks as
possible so I couldn't trust anyone to
speak through so I feel like this book
was the only way that I could really
communicate everything that I'd been
holding on to for years because I
mean yeah it was really tough but I
literally fought until I couldn't fight
anymore
and maybe that's not enough for a lot of
people but I feel like I created the
most efficient fighting style that ever
created that that was that's ever
existed and um I had to realize that
only people that are truly great can
recognize greatness I wanted to be so
great that only that even an idiot
couldn't um deny it but
um but then I realized after going into
pro wrestling that retiring undefeated
and taking the equity that I had with me
wouldn't have been what was best for the
sport even though I know that I'm better
than all these girls and by [__] long
shot and I always will
be taking my Equity away from me so that
everybody is knows that wouldn't would
actually tarnish my legacy it wouldn't
make everybody take the the women after
me seriously and so it it had to happen
for the for you know the the betterment
of the sport but you know sometimes it
it still stings a little bit that it's
you know I'm not recognized as the
greatest ever what I know I am but my
mom said all the time really quick you
have this picture here that she didn't
care if everybody knew she was the best
in the world she only cared if she knew
she didn't care if that nobody knew who
was the first American world champion of
Judo back in 1984 it was important to
her and um
I think like somewhere along the way um
I it started to matter more what other
people thought than what I thought and
so um I think being being forced back to
to that was actually the best thing that
could have happened to me I don't think
people realize the extent of they see it
as kind of just a game you fighting they
see it's some kind of game that they're
watching like they're playing on Xbox or
Playstation but I don't think they
understand the extent of the devastation
on a human level that you kind of
experience after that loss and I think
until you did that interview with Ellen
where you revealed that you'd gone back
to your changing room and you had the
sort of this sort of suicidal ideation
about the
future most people didn't realize the
extent of it until then did you
literally have suicidal
ideation in the days and hours following
the fight no it was basically like
instantly when I came backstage
uh but you know
um suicide is the kind of thing that
becomes more prevalent if you know it's
in your family and I've literally had
two generations of suicide ahead of me
it's just something that um it's always
a like a an option in your mind once
it's shown to you you
know um but I think that the fact that I
was with Trav then my husband now
that I just didn't want to like take the
pain that I had in me and give it to him
because that's what how I experienced
suicide was like okay it's you get to
relieve yourself of that pain but you
have to you passed on to everybody else
and um my my you know but my dad was
dying anyway he wouldn't have been able
to prevent his his death and he was you
know physically suffering every day and
so that so I understand that
and um I didn't feel like I had that
same kind of justification that I wasn't
going to die anyway so um I was going
going to live for him and for my family
so that they wouldn't have to to to take
the pain that I was feeling onto
them was that the hardest moment in your
professional
career professionally
yeah was it the hardest moment in your
personal life no losing my dad was
course you went on to fight Amanda Nunes
as at UFC 207 in 2016 and the the fight
um ends again and after this you come to
the decision that your time at the UFC
is over and you decide to to move on to
the WWE there's a sort of a two-year Gap
I believe between about a one-year gap
between the Nunes fight and the WWE
announcement what happens in your life
in that Gap um I was mostly just being
sad I was just like sad and high and
playing video games and eating
Crepes I mean everybody wants to rush
you through grieving things but you know
I think it's important and so I took
that time to myself I was also just so
worn out from you know like I said
Running on Fumes for years on end and
like literally dragging myself out of
bed every morning and like having to dig
deep every second of the day that I just
you know wanted to dig deep and just
disappear I had you know Paparazzi and
all kinds of crazy [__] happening at the
time and I
just just like didn't want to be famous
anymore
so um it was always more of a tool than
a goal and now that I didn't have fights
to promote I didn't need it anymore but
I guess it wasn't done with me so I kind
of had to like um disappear for a while
to be left alone were you doing anything
professionally during that period we
just at home um I mean I
um oh just at home I feel like I just
needed to
not give
anymore I don't think anyone can
understand how exhausted I was and how
much it had been asked of me for so long
that I just needed to rest I needed a
mentally and physically
rest and um but people of you know dug
deep enough to make it to two Olympics
and win 15 fights in a row you know not
people a lot of people understand how
much effort that takes and um just
sounds like numbers when you say it but
when you live it it's just like I
literally had nothing left in me I could
barely get out of bed so I
mean it's not the kind of like tired
that you can take a long sleep from and
wake up refreshed you know like it's
like the kind attire that takes like a
year to recover from is that is that
depression in your yes so you could you
could call it
depression um but you know I I didn't
see anyone get
diagnosed your your husband was there
throughout that period with you yeah he
was there the whole time he was the one
supplying the
Crepes yeah he's amazing he he really
was you know helped drag me out of my
own hole
and I'm very much like you know like a
Gollum cave creature in general like I
just will
like not not leave my my little Den um
but he's like very much a social
butterfly and he would make sure that
like okay you need to go out and
interact with human beings and I'm like
no which you know it's always kind of
been how I was I I always struggled
socially and stuff like that um which is
why I got into Judo was to be able to
like socialize and just be able to talk
and communicate and so um I just kind of
reverted back to like my my hermit
Tendencies and yeah Trav literally had
to like drag me out of my hole and um
I'm glad you did but um yeah I would
easily SL slide back into the Misty
Mountains anytime I was allowed did he
understand what you were going through
psychologically in that period were you
able to communicate it Tim um I think he
understood to an extent like he uh he
had a different kind of incredible story
where he started fighting at 26 and then
was the number one contender in at the
UFC in as much time it is it took me to
be the number one contender in the UFC
so he was like incredibly naturally
talented but he hadn't been you know
um pursuing a goal of athletic greatness
since he was six the way that I had and
so um just the disappointment of you
know never going never winning an
Olympic gold medal and never being able
to retire undefeated and those kind of
like lifelong goals um I don't think a
lot of people understand that but he
also was still like so supportive and
there for me you know and he never got
fed up with me moping around and
literally crying over like eggs if I
like know broke the Yol and be like I
can't even make you eggs you know and
like just being like that for like yeah
over a year and stuff and his like he's
just such incredible love patience it
was just like there for me all the time
and just like bring me in and hold me
when I needed it even if he didn't like
understand why I was so sad he was like
there for it anyway so yeah he's the
best thing that ever happened to me I
love him so
much but yeah he might not have
understood it so much but he was still
there for
me you knew you're going to get me at
some point I told you I'm emotional no I
no it's often in those moments um our
hardest moments that we
realize as you said earlier who we've
got around us but also the value of
certain people in our lives I think in
my hardest times in my life that's
that's following those times is when I
realized who really really mattered and
my partner in particular through my
hardest moments I've you go through the
the Dark Canyon of these tough times in
life and you emerg that person walked
through it with you and you go [__]
hell this person now I understand how
much they mean to me sometimes it takes
that to understand what someone means to
you um and it certainly sounds like that
moment crystallized what Travis means to
you in your life as well yeah I think
when we first got together we went
through so much stuff that would have
driven anybody else apart but it really
just brought us all brought us brought
the two of us closer together and I'm
just so glad that we were with each
other when we were going through the
hardest times that we didn't have to go
through it
alone what is the WWE come in so that's
ultimately what sort of I guess pulled
you out of your little cave there but
yeah I I had to get out of the cave and
in front of like a crowd of thousands of
people alive of course which is really
funny because I really don't like it I
don't like being in front of crowds and
a bunch of people and I hate public
speaking but I just love the stuff that
I get to do while doing it you
know um but yeah I like kind of my
friends uh the the four hseen Shea
Jasmine and Marina that were like of
friends that I made I mean I knew Marina
back from Judo and I met cha and jasine
through MMA and like we really became
like really close in that group and you
know for me for how hard it was for me
to like socialize and make friends like
these were like my girls you know and
they all started getting into pro
wrestling and um I just started doing it
for fun and it was just so fun and like
it wasn't a competition it was everyone
working together to try and do something
great together and so it reminded me
more of like you know like filming
action movies and doing fight
choreography except for it was kind of
like in its purest form where you have
to tell the story like the movie you
have like the movie part and then
there's a fight and then the story and
like usually the fight is like separate
from that and I feel like pro wrestling
is like the the purest form of combat
storytelling because you can only tell
the story through the com that I was
just fascinated with that especially you
know want to be Bruce Lee and um and it
became that thing that like I started to
fixate on and wanted to be better and
better at it and just would um go into
training and lose track of time and
realized that I've been going for 5
hours kind of a thing and um and I love
that feeling of being lost in something
uh told my friend I was telling somebody
like passion is my passion I'd just love
to be passionate about things and you
know know I guess that flow state is fun
and I just love being in it and um so um
yeah then I started just training for
fun and then
um then uh ended up you know getting I
didn't really get an opportunity to go
to WWE I was kind of like hey guys I
want to do
this and then they were like okay um and
yeah then just kind of snowballed into
cuz at first I was like okay I want to
have a baby soon
and it'd be kind of cool to go and do
some pro wrestling for a couple months
before I go and have my baby and then it
just kind of like snowballed into this
whole beast and this whole like other
life that I didn't know that um I was
going to have but it was very much like
like a calling much more than a Pursuit
if that made sense you know once upon a
time if you had a business idea it was
exceptionally difficult to get going but
now in the age of Shopify it is
exceptionally easy as many of you will
know Shopify are a sponsor of this
podcast if you don't know Shopify it's
an exceptionally simple web platform for
anybody that's got an idea that wants to
transact on a global scale so things
like these conversation cards which we
sell we've sold using Shopify and it
only took us a couple of clicks to get
going so why did we choose Shopify for a
number of reasons but I think one of the
big ones which goes unappreciated is
their checkout system converts 36%
better compared to other platforms and
here's what I'm going to do to remove
the cost for you if you go to
shopify.com Bartlet you'll be able to
try Shopify for
$1 a month I've seen Shopify completely
change people's lives and for many of
you I think it could change
yours one of the things that surpris
surprised me and again it's because if
we only get to see this sort of 2D
representation of someone on a screen
whether they're you know through your
wrestling career or UFC career which is
kind of like it's kind of like all of
it's kind of like acting the press
conferences the bravado is in your book
you talk about how comments online and
com newspaper comments and stuff would
get to
you I mean you know starts off like
that but yeah um at first you know um
when everything was going great it was
like I would look at my comments like
the morning newspaper I'd wake up in the
morning and look at my comments I look
at my tag photos and it's so
unhealthy but um but after my first loss
I quit cold turkeying which I feel like
that was one thing that I needed to do
was to like not constantly need that um
outside validation and stuff like that
especially from the internet and social
media and stuff and I was kind of like
spiraling in a way and and kind of like
giving that way too much stock in my
like emotional you know State and stuff
stuff like that and um and then pro
wrestling you're literally in front of a
a crowd that is like the embodiment of a
comment section in front of
yourself um but um you know that's also
why I really uh enjoyed being a heel
which I you know wish they would have
let me be a heel more often because um
that's why I feel like I was happy
happiest when I wasn't trying to plate
to the crowd purposely try to you know
piss them off and get a rise out of them
and not trying to um constantly you know
um Pander I was surprised to hear about
the WWE that they kind of rewrite the
script last minute and that it's not I
don't you think of such a big business
you imagine they got script writers and
the scripts are written you would think
it wouldn't be an absolute cluster [__]
[__] show and you would be wrong
wow yeah yeah it and it's so needlessly
dangerous like no one can is like a lot
of times people can't rehearse things
have changed last minute a lot of times
you see them outside they're performing
they've only talked about it and they're
doing it for the first time so a lot of
these injuries happen because people
just weren't able to rehearse and the
company doesn't give a [__] because
we're all Expendable to them did you
feel Expendable to the UFC to the WWE
yes yeah I think you all we all did and
they they made sure to make us feel that
way why they made sure to make you feel
that way yeah so that you wouldn't get
above your station or something or so
that you would just do whatever you're
told yeah just do whatever you're told
just take it and you're all contractors
at at the WWE as well so you're not
employees you have to pay for your own
health care and all these kinds of
things from what I read in your book yep
which is pretty crazy I mean that would
never be allowed in uh where I'm from in
the UK and it's sort of Vince McMahon's
Kingdom
yeah well I mean supposedly he's out now
because they you know caught him paying
py company funds so he can show on some
girls head in the office and you know do
a threesome with her Johnny laurenitis
but um his cronies are still there and
so when that stuff started coming out
and Vince was gone before he was still
basically just calling it in and running
the company and um but yeah like Bruce
Pritchard who's there now who's still
like the head of creative or whatever
title they gave him um is basically just
taking orders from Vince and still
running the company through him and so
when Vince was uh
uh resigned formally because of all
these like sexual allegations and stuff
that were coming out um he was still
running the company informally and I
think he still is to this day you don't
have a a whole lot of nice things to say
about these people I mean depends on who
the girls in locker room I absolutely
love them the people at the top running
yeah I mean Stephen Triple H I think
they're honest ly doing their best but I
mean I think that Vince McMahon just
created a fundamentally sick environment
and uh I think if if Ari is going to be
able is going to be able if Ari Emanuel
who bought it out from WME is going to
be able to actually make this
multi-billion dollar dysfunctional
organization into one that functions
he's got to clean out all of Vince's
cronies he's got to completely clean
house and uh remove Vince's influence
completely but um you know no one's
asking me
but that's just what I experienced when
Vince was gone he was still running the
show through um you know people that
he'd hired in the past Bruce Pritchard
being number one of them Bruce
pritchard's still there I believe yeah
John laurenitis took like he he was uh
he was cut loose because he got named
specifically in in the Scandal but uh
yeah Bruce pitchard is literally I'd
never heard him say a single one of his
own opinions he'd only said that Vince
says this Vince says that Vince says
this Vince says this Vince Vince Vince
Vince and so he's literally just like
you know I I called him Vince's Avatar
that's basically what he is you returned
to the UFC after you left in
2019 um you were there till from 2017 to
2019 and um in 2017 you is when you got
married with Travis I couldn't figure
out from the from the dates I didn't
think the date was in your book but at
some point during this journey you you
start trying to have children mhm um
something I'm trying now with my partner
on that process as well and you talk in
the book about a really heartbreaking
incident where you're filming a TV show
with 911 the TV show
911 um and there was a a fight scenes
and various stunts in that movie and a
day after that you suffered a
miscarriage yeah I um well I found out I
was pregnant right before the show
started filming and then I um my finger
got chopped off from a boat door falling
on it and
um but you know the we got we went and
checked out and there's you know the
baby seemed just fine uh but then I
miscarried a couple weeks later so I
kind of always felt like that was my
fault that I wanted to keep doing
dangerous stuff while I was pregnant
because I thought it made me cool and
then
um and then I was just like depressed
and like drinking and smoking not taking
care of myself and then got pregnant
right away again and then we never even
saw a heartbeat that time but I wasn't
expecting anything more cuz I just
wasn't taken care of myself so you had
two miscarriages two miscarriages yeah
and then I went through IVF four Cycles
to IVF to be able to get eight embryos
CU we wanted to have like three or four
kids and the first one that we used um
actually worked that that's you know
Thea my daughter now but
um but yeah we're in the process of
doing it right now and I just got news
yesterday that our first cycle didn't
work so it's tough anyone going through
is tough and like people just don't talk
about it but you know it's hard CU you
have like so much hope every time
and and um yeah I don't know I'll just
have to wait till the end of this book
tour to try again but I was really
hoping to be pregnant
today
but you know it's the kind of thing that
like nobody talks about so and so so
many women think they're going through
it alone but
um uh it's really really
common but it's just it's really hard
when things don't work
out so many women and couples are going
through this and as you as you say it's
not something we talk about because the
mixture of feelings Sur in it are comp
complex to say the least yeah I think
like you know no one wants to burden
anybody else with what they're going
through but a lot of times it's not
you're not burdening other people
you're you
know I don't know if it's like
camaraderie but you're offering
something to to other people that are
going through the same thing and a lot
of times it's like a woman you can feel
like it's you know your fault but you
know your Peak productive years are your
Peak Athletic years so I I decided to
use those on my career and um you know
thankfully I was able to get a bunch of
embryos when I was young and hopefully
you know we'll be able to still have a
couple more kids but you know I still I
got my PO and I got my boys so you know
I got a lot more than than most than a
lot of people that have been through it
but you
know so you got three kids in total two
of them are from Travis's previous
relationship with his previous partner
where you're now the stepmother and
you've had a daughter of your own yeah
people don't understand the because
there are people that have gone through
this and they understand although
because no one's talking about it
they've not had their feelings echoed by
someone publicly before and then there's
this other group of people that have
never been through the sort of IVF
journey of success failure failure
success failure etc for those people
that have never experienced it what what
is that like what the complexity of the
emotions that you you experience in
thoughts it's just a grind It's a Grind
and it's really hard on you mentally and
physically your body and um
like like um this last cycle I wasn't
allowed to like you know work out or
anything for weeks on end and so it's
like my first time around when I had to
do like four Cycles in a row and then
the transfer cycle I mean like I I was
like just not recognizing able
physically and
um and uh just mentally so worn out
you're on all these kind of hormones and
you're going through this like emotional
roller coaster and stuff and you just
you can't really talk about it you know
and
um and uh yeah sometimes
like like I would you know have just
people that are like psychotic trolls
that like try and follow me around
online and like braak me about these
kind of things about like at the time
mind like not not having a a kid when I
was trying and and stuff like that and
that's I guess the the way you have to
live with being a public figure but and
you're not supposed to say anything
about it because how dare you not be
grateful for your good fortune but man
it um it it sucks when you're going
through it and you feel like you know
the world is also still looking over
your shoulder and you're not living up
to you know your own expectations I
don't know um if there's
a I don't know if there's a feminine
word for emasculating but is uh you know
eminating it feels like if you if you
can't naturally have like a baby like I
mean my doctor was like if you probably
if you stopped smoking and drinking you
could have a baby like you know smoke a
bunch of weed and drinking you naturally
have a baby but because we wanted to
have so many he was like you should get
all your embryos now so when you're
older you can take your time and and do
it and so it's just like yeah it's tough
because as a woman you have to choose am
I going to go for a career during my
Peak years or am I going to like go for
kids and so know luckily you know
science makes it so you can have both
but it doesn't make it
easy this has been very front to mind
for me because um because I'm trying now
and uh I've actually sat here yesterday
with two fertility doctors two different
fertility doctors because I really
wanted to understand the whole process
and
understand because you know I think
people typically think that fertility is
a a female thing but the fertilities do
doctors told me quite clearly that when
they go through the IVF rounds it's
50/50 typically as to why sort of a baby
isn't conceived it's 50% of the time
it's the man 50% of the time it's the
woman and so I I'm really grateful that
you share that because lots of people
are struggling and increasingly the IVF
clinics I think I think of the top of my
head have grown 90% in popularity over
the last couple of years and because
we're having our careers are being
extended further and um a variety of
other things but sperm counts are
dropping testosterone levels are
dropping it's only going to get more
common yeah and one thing I will say
that's great about it is because I did
go through twoe pregnancies that you
know my my doctor told me it was
probably because it wasn't because you
chopped your finger off it wasn't
because if you were drinking or smoking
like it was because there
were um genetically not conducive to
life and so the great thing with IVF is
you get these embryos and you can have
them tested first and then you you don't
have to make a decision at 20 weeks long
of like oh your baby has this kind of
you know disorder Mal formality and have
to make that decision and so you know
that they're they're healthy going into
it but then when you put all that effort
into it and you you finally do it and
then it doesn't work out I mean that's
that's crushing in itself too you know
so it's it's tough I mean science is
amazing but um it is like a really
difficult process to go through what is
your happiness from these days you've
had a real sort of uh a pivot in terms
of where you look for happiness over the
last couple of years yeah I mean my
happiness is every day with my family
that's that's what it is and I'm so
lucky that I get to be like you
know retired in my mid-30s and um be
able to spend like all my time with my
my my husband and my kids and like to be
there for them and to be able not have
to like worry about so much you know and
get to just focus on them and um yeah I
don't know just day to day I I just I
mean I say like I'm retired but like I
still do stuff but I don't do stuff with
the intention of like I have to pay the
bills with this and so yeah I mean I'm
not like only like only my my husand
only a wife and mom like I started uh uh
writing as just a way to like kind of
help me from you know not fixating on
like my myself or picking at myself and
got into like screenwriting and um which
is just like a really great way
for if I'm having like just you know not
like a destructive thought process or
something like that that I can like turn
my mind into towards something creative
and actually like make something out of
all of that you know mental energy that
I'm just turning Inward and like hurting
myself with and so um so then came out
with this book and I've actually I'm
working on my
fourth script right now and my first
one's being made into a comic book and
um which I touch on in another book too
but it's also like doing these kind of
things not with the intention of like
making millions of dollars or you know
impressing a bunch of people but just
that the act of it is so fun like I'm a
I'm interning right now at the story
department at WME that's what I was
working on in the car yeah I'm learning
um how to be a reader and write
coverages and just you know read lots of
lots of scripts and make me a better
writer and like learn like the Dark Art
of like writing coverages which people
don't see they're not at public but to
be able to just still a script down to
his few words as possible and know what
you're looking for and all these things
and just kind of like learning these
skills that I'm really fascinated in and
um that's just like validating in
themselves you know and like and with
our Ranch and everything like that and
raising our cows and like my favorite
part is we took this land in Oregon that
was like completely degraded you know
had been mismanaged for years there was
more dirt than there was grass and to be
able to we're using regenerative
practices with our wagu and our and our
py to be able to like bring this land
back to life you know so that was like
been more rewarding to me than reading a
whole morning of positive comments on a
freaking picture is actually like going
out and like seeing this land become
better and um like that kind of stuff is
like really rewarding and I don't have
to worry about you know uh promoting it
or what people will think of it or how
much money I'm making from it so yeah
like I'm retired but I'm busy it must be
difficult to go from those Arenas that I
watched you in all around the world with
all those people screaming and cheering
to this Farm in Oregon because I don't
know I don't know one assumes that the
ADR we always talk about this adrenaline
rush that you get from fighting and
competing the opposite of that is a farm
and Oregon I guess so but I mean I love
my favorite crowds to like wrestle in
front of are like small crowds I love
being like in a small non-televised
crowd that's my favorite and like fight
I could fight in a closet I could fight
in Arena it's not making it better to me
you know I just want to win the fight
like the fight itself is what I care
about that's what gave me the joy I was
completely blocking them out I mean
they're they're welcome to be there but
they're it's but they're not that
they're not part of my actual experience
of the fight itself I mean winning and
everyone being like w i mean that's an
incredible feeling that's great but um
but that's not why I got into it I
didn't get into like you know Judo isn't
like a big sport that there's going to
be crowds of people cheering for you for
you know you anyone that's crazy enough
to want to win Olympic gold medal and
anything it's not because they want to
be famous or they want a whole bunch of
people to know or cheer for them it's
because they want to be the best at
something and I just love that process
of go going from knowing nothing about
something to mastering it I love the
process of Mastery you you used the word
earlier on self-destructive thoughts am
I right in thinking that your
self-destructive thoughts which appear
to still be with you today are the
reason in part why you you were so great
when it came to the UFC and fighting
yeah I guess like you know enter that
that flow State I guess of being like so
um lost in doing something that you
can't think of anything else everything
else just appears like that was always
my favorite place to be you know in
swimming I didn't have that your mind
was left to wander while you're swimming
or in Judo you know there's nothing
happening except for what's happening in
front of you and fighting there's
nothing going on except for what's going
on in front of you and in pro wrestling
there's nothing going on except for the
the reality you created in this match
that you're in and um yeah I I love
being completely lost in the in the task
of doing something the best that you can
like that's something that's addicting
and I guess something that I still do
now you know trying to do like through
through writing and and everything like
that but um I don't know I just
uh I guess it's just U where my where my
happy place is but you know do you still
have those self-destructive thoughts
today oh yeah I mean all the time but I
mean it's just kind of like something
you'll like wake up and be like oh my
God I remember that thing that you said
several years ago that was so stupid
remember that thing you tweeted you
stupid [__] like you know like just
things that like come up that you can't
do anything about it
but um just you know ruminate and
sometimes it's like you know try not to
think of a blue duck kind of a thing
yeah and a lot of times it's like that
it's sometimes I'll be in in the middle
of something great and I'll just be like
don't think of something bad and then
because of that it'll like pop up in my
head and yeah I don't know did you go to
therapy at any point in your
career I mean I've tried but I'm you
know my mom's a psychologist so you know
uh anyone that I went to talk too I was
just kind of like you're not as smart as
my
mom yeah but I I tempted but I've never
found anyone that I really like clicked
with but I've given it a couple shots
but Ian I mean maybe it's not for
everybody I don't think it's for me the
other picture that I found when I was
doing my research is this beautiful
picture here and the question I have for
you is about the lessons you learned
from this
man oh I'm going to keep this you can
keep both of them ah lessons I
learned you know I wish I remembered
more we don't even have video or
anything you know very few
pictures um but I don't know
like it's just more of like examples
that he gave me of how to actually like
be a man and how to be a great husband
like my mom and dad were so in love with
each other I remember they would like
make out over our breakfast and be like
e yeah I know but um he was like so in
love with my mom and she was so in love
with him and um I think that's why I was
smart enough to wait until Trav to get
married because I knew what I was
looking for and so he showed me what a
loving husband and father is and you
know he's the one that when my mom was
so worried about you know me being late
developmentally and all these things my
mom said he was the one that was always
like you know Ronnie's as sleeper she's
going to show everybody and so he was
always the one that like believed that I
was going to be like exceptional and put
that belief in my mind that I am
exceptional and I'm going to do
incredible things and so yeah so didn't
never forgot it I guess I think he was
right you named after him right he's
called Ron yeah I was supposed to be
Ronald John Rousey Jr but I'm a girl so
I'm Ronda Jee Rousey the
first not the
last and you did show everyone that's
exactly what you did in your career you
showed everyone and um you know it's
funny because I I'm a big UFC fan so I
watched your career enjoyed it so much
you gave me some incredible moments
throughout all of the the sort of those
major fights that you had and it's
interesting because from reading your
book and speaking to you today I
realized the very human cost of the
entertainment that I enjoyed as a fan I
behind that sat someone who is quite
clearly pretty obsessed with winning
being Mastery in your own words and
being the very best at everything you
apply yourself to and with that comes a
cost you know we don't have to pay the
cost as fans we just get to enjoy the
entertainment and so it's very easy I
think without the full picture being
illuminated to not pay tribute to
someone who gave us so much fans but in
behind the scenes had to struggle in
really profound ways from the age of 6
years old um for that joy that you
brought to all of our lives so on behalf
of fans that do understand the full
piture i' personally want to say thank
you so much for that because um yeah you
know I I used to step up at 3:00 4 a.m.
in the morning in the UK to watch you
fight because you were like nothing I'd
ever seen you know you defined the
division you you basically created the
the concept of women fighting in the UFC
and you did it in a way with a style
that I'd never seen before and frankly
haven't really seen since so thank you
for that I know it's difficult I I can
tell from when you talk about those
moments how difficult it still is but
that's what I would expect from someone
who is one of the real goats of the
sport thank you for writing this book as
well it's um incredibly honest and I
think it's perfectly written in many
respects but the timing of it is perfect
because you're in a certain chapter of
your life where you're able to look back
on all of these experiences with a
certain retrospect Ive Clarity and
wisdom that is incredibly helpful and
you found yourself on the other side of
all of this stuff now as a as a mother
and as a as a normal human away from the
the WWE and the UFC and from that
perspective I think everyone can learn a
tremendous amount about life about
happiness about family about committing
yourselves to Something in the way in
with the form of Mastery that you had um
but also more more than anything what I
take from it is what really matters in
life and I think that's if I've
interpreted it correctly as the real
objective of the book we have a closing
tradition on this podcast where the last
guest leaves a question for the next
guest not knowing who they're leaving it
for uh oh why does everyone get scared
when I when I go to this diary okay I
don't know okay interesting fear the
unknown it's not it's not it's not
terrifying sometimes they're horrific um
what was the most fun moment of your
entire life of my entire life yeah most
fun
God I mean I've had a lot of
[Laughter]
fun um they're probably intimate moments
with my husband that I can't
share but we have a good
time he'll be happy for the shout out I
think that's what
matters Ronda Rousey AR fight out
available everywhere right now um an
incredible book and I recommend everyone
to go and get it thank you so much Ronda
thank you for having me
[Music]
oh